Much of today's scientific knowledge exists only in digital form, and can be processed only with the help of computers. Large datasets are stored in files or databases. Complex scientific models and methods exist only as software implementations. The notations used to encode this knowledge were not developed for scientific communication, and are in fact not very suitable for this. Programming languages in particular are a very bad notation for scientific models. As a consequence, digital scientific knowledge is hard to verify, hard to discuss, and often not even published at all.

In my work in computational biophysics, I have found myself in such situations more than once. Papers refer to simulation software rather than to models. Even if you can get the software, extracting the model from it is nearly impossible. If you want to know the charges put on each atom in a protein, you have to wade through thousands of lines of code. Worse, if two programs, or two versions of a program, are supposed to compute the same result but don't, figuring out the cause of the difference is practically impossible. Other domains of computational science suffer from similar problems. If you wonder what a modern climate model looks like, it's simply a piece of software that simulates climate evolution.

I would like to change this situation by developping formal languages explicitly designed as digital scientific notations. Digital scientific knowledge can then be published, annotated, and discussed. It would not be absorbed by some software's source code, but be part of the software's specification. Indeed, specification languages are one of the starting points of my project. Computer algebra programs are another one. In the end, I envision a computational model to be a machine-readable file that contains all the science and nothing but the science, unencumbered by technicalities such as performance optimizations that make up for a large part of scientific software complexity.

It's also worth keeping in mind what digital scientific notations are _not_: executable programming languages. They may well define quantities but not say how to compute them, much like differential equations do. Digital scientific knowledge is_not_ a form of high-level software. This is the main difference with the long-standig attempts to make domain-specific languages for science. Digital scientific notations are part of the human-computer interface when doing science. They are tools for thought, not tools for making software.

